---
layout: page
title: "Projects"
description: ""
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I have served as the technical point person or technical lead on a fair number
of projects through the years. My language of choice has always been a shifting
one - from Java to PHP to Ruby to Python. I generally spend most of my time on
the back end, with an eye towards building familiarity with whatever tool might
best fit the job at hand.

You can, of course, find some of my work on [GitHub](http://github.com/briandailey).

<p class="lead">A few highlights along the way...</p>

#### 2001-2004

Added new features and maintained a Java-based EMR system for [dermatopathology labs](http://www.hypercharts.com/hyperpath.net/)
 as well as a similar EMR for [general practices](http://hypercharts.com/). At
 the time, EMR systems were still in infancy, but the project is still (as far
 as I know) in active use.

#### 2004-2005

While consulting under the business name Daitech I built several PHP-based
applications. One of which was a PHP-based tracking system for appraisal
companies that is still in use.

#### 2005-2006

Built a vendor referral system for [durable medical equipment
companies](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Durable_medical_equipment) from the
ground up. The system not only connected vendors with physicians, but it also
facilitated the process of confirming that purchases were Medicare approved.
While at the same company, I helped build a Java-based front end for a
Medicare-rules system that allowed users to ask natural-language questions
about Medicare (for example, "How much must a patient weigh to qualify for a
heavy duty wheel chair?"). The engine driving the knowledge based was a
technology licensed from Oak Ridge National Laboratories.


#### 2006-2010

While freelancing in New York under the business name Realm3, I was able to
fair number of very interesting projects. In nearly all projects, I was the
sole technical lead (and often the only technical person on the project
at all).

I worked with the advertising agency Ultra16 to build a social engagement
platform for Miss Universe fans. I also built out an engagement platform for an
online reality show put together by MTV for graphic designers, "The Engine
Room."

For the ad agency Crispin, Porter, and Bogusky, I built out a Facebook
application for Best Buy that allowed users to create Secret Santa games. The
site rolled out during a national advertising campaign and was generally
well-received by social media.

Other projects included a tracking system for environmental compliance at
pharmaceutical companies, and a platform that performed financial analysis
and comparisons for 529 Plans.

#### 2010-2014

While working as a consultant, I built the first iteration of a health-care
market research platform that eventually became Stratasan. I served as CTO,
growing the applications features and adopting new technologies (such as Amazon
Redshift) over time.

------

As I continue to work in the industry, I'm always looking forward to new
projects to make lives better. If you think you've got a project that I might
be interested in, hit me up! My contact information is on the
[about](/about.html) page.
