---
layout: post
title: "The Rudeness Test"
category: nashville
tags: [nashville, hiring, culture]
---

At one of the recent user groups, I had an interesting conversation with Nick, a
senior developer from San Francisco who is responsible for hiring a remote team
here in Nashville.

Developers have a reputation for being difficult to work with, and this is
especially true in coastal cities. As part of his interview process, Nick
included a filter test for rudeness.

One of the measures for testing this is that Nick will interrupt an interviewee
in the middle of a discussion. If the candidate continues talking over Nick,
that's generally a bad thing. If the candidate stops and politely waits for Nick
to have his say, that indicates someone who is willing to give way when
necessary.

According to Nick, no one in Nashville failed the rudeness test. In fact, Nick
is now concerned that he needs a different approach for folks in Nashville. How
can he be sure that they are aggressive enough that they will interrupt someone
if they drone on and on?

As an aside: when I lived in New York for a short while, this cultural
difference was a tough one for me (a native Southerner) to adjust to. There were
many situations in a group where one person would start talking over another.
Meanwhile, the original speaker, unwilling to give up the floor, would continue
talking. I generally try to make eye contact with whoever is speaking to me, so
if two people are talking at once I'm trying to figure out who I should be
looking at and paying attention to.

Of course, this is a very simplified view of cultural and regional norms (I
certainly learned to appreciate the bluntness of friends from NYC), but it's
still an interesting illustration of how different cultures can have different
issues when hiring for a cultural fit.
